---
# Project: Data Lake on AWS

## Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

Developer is responsible for knowledge on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. You'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.

### Data Sets
Developer will be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:


- **<em>Song dataset</em>**: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
<br>
JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.<br>All files are nested in subdirectories under */data/song_data*.<br>Below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

- **<em>Log dataset</em>**: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`
<br>
log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.<br>The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month.<br>All files are nested in subdirectories under */data/log_data*. <br>Below is an example record in log files:

```
{"artist":"Des'ree","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Kaylee","gender":"F","itemInSession":1,"lastName":"Summers","length":246.30812,"level":"free","location":"Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540344794796.0,"sessionId":139,"song":"You Gotta Be","status":200,"ts":1541106106796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/35.0.1916.153 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"8"}
```

## Database Schema
The schema used for this exercise is the Star Schema:
There is one main fact table containing all the measures associated to each event (user song plays) and 4 dimension tables.


#### Fact Table
**<em>songplays</em>** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables
**<em>users</em>** - users in the app
- user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

**<em>artists</em>** - artists in music database
- artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

**<em>songs</em>** - songs in music database
- song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

**<em>time</em>** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
- start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Project structure

Files used on the project:
1. **dl.cfg** config the essential AWS credentials.
2. **etl.py** create Spark session, then reads and processes ALL files <em>**song_data**</em> and <em>**log_data**</em> from S3 bucket and loads them into Spark, then extract data ETL pipeline required. Inserting the result back to S3 bucket.
3. **README.md** provides discussion on the project.


### How to Run

1. Create an S3 Bucket named **sparkify-udacity-dend** where the final result (fact table and dimension tables would be stored here.)


2. Fill in essential configuration in **dl.cfg** file
```
[AWS]
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=

```

3. Open Terminal and Run **etl.py** in console for deploy Spark process and start loading data from S3 to to Spark and inserting processed result into fact table and dimension tables at S3.<br>
  `$ python etl.py`
